docs: add dataset schema validation (#1304)
apify/apify-docs: sources/platform/actors/development/actor_definition/dataset_schema/validation.md

slug: /actors/development/actor-definition/dataset-schema/validation
---

**Specify the dataset schema within the Actors so you can add monitoring and validation at the field level.**

---

To define a schema for a default dataset of an Actor run, you need to set `fields` property in the dataset schema.

:::info

The schema defines a single item in the dataset. Be careful not to define the schema as an array, it always needs to be a schema of an object.

Schema configuration is not available for named datasets or dataset views.

:::

You can either do that directly through `actor.json`:

```json title=".actor.json"
{
    "actorSpecification": 1,
    "storages": {
        "dataset": {
            "actorSpecification": 1,
            "fields": {
                "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
                "type": "object",
                "properties": {
                    "name": {
                        "type": "string"
                    }
                },
                "required": ["name"]
            },
            "views": {}
        }
    }
}
```

> Or in a separate separate file linked from the `.actor.json`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or in a separate file linked from the `.actor.json`:
```

    "price": {
        "type": ["string", "number"]
    }
}
```

Field with type `any`:

```json
{
    "price": {
        "type": ["string", "number", "object", "array", "boolean"]
    }
}
```

Enabling fields to be `null` :

```json
{
    "name": {
        "type": "string",
        "nullable": true
    }
}
```

Define type of objects in array:

```json
{
    "comments": {
        "type": "array",
        "items": {
            "type": "object",
            "properties": {
                "author_name": {
                    "type": "string"
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Define specific fields, but allow anything else to be added to the item:

```json
{
    "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
        "name": {
            "type": "string"
        }
    },
    "additionalProperties": true
}
```

See [json schema reference](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/reference) for additional options.

You can also use [conversion tools](https://www.liquid-technologies.com/online-json-to-schema-converter) to convert an existing JSON document into it's JSON schema.

## Dataset field statistics

> When you configure the dataset fields schema, we generates a field list and measure the following statistics:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you configure the dataset fields schema, we generate a field list and measure the following statistics:
```

---
title: Dataset validation
description:  Specify the dataset schema within the Actors so you can add monitoring and validation down to the field level.
slug: /actors/development/actor-definition/dataset-schema/validation
---

**Specify the dataset schema within the Actors so you can add monitoring and validation down to the field level.**

---

> To define a schema for a default dataset of an Actor run, you need to set `fields` property in the dataset schema. It’s currently impossible to set a schema for a named dataset (same as for dataset views).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To define a schema for a default dataset of an Actor run, you need to set `fields` property in the dataset schema. Apify does not currently support schema for named datasets (same as for dataset views).
```

Reviewer 2: > It’s currently impossible

just feels to me kind of strong, no strong opinion here

Reviewer: I would also drop `currently`. I am not a fan of this phrasing within docs, since reader has no idea what is `currently` unless they dive head first into commit history of docs repo. 

I would suggest something like

```suggestion
To define a schema for a default dataset of an Actor run, you need to set `fields` property in the dataset schema.
```

or maybe with an admonition if we want to keep this information (my personal favourite), once we support this we can just delete the admonition

```suggestion
To define a schema for a default dataset of an Actor run, you need to set `fields` property in the dataset schema.

:::note Schema limitations

Schema configuration is not available for named datasets or dataset views.

:::
```

:::info

> The schema defines a single item in the dataset. Be careful not to define the schema as an array, it always needs to be a schema of an object.

Reviewer 2: @gippy, does user get an error when this happens?

Reviewer 3: I'm not actually 100% sure. I think you could theoretically set the top level type of the schema to array. Will test it tomorrow. If it's possible then we will try to add some check to build so that the creator cannot do it.

Reviewer 2: Y, let's throw an error as early as possible so ideally in the build. Later it's too late.

:::

> You can either do that directly through `actor.json` like this:

Reviewer 2: I am not very opinionated here but it feels like unnecessary

```suggestion
You can either do that directly through `actor.json`:
```

```json title=".actor.json"
{
    "actorSpecification": 1,
    "storages": {
        "dataset": {
            "actorSpecification": 1,
            "fields": {
                "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
                "type": "object",
                "properties": {
                    "name": {
                        "type": "string"
                    }
                },
                "required": ["name"]
            },
            "views": {}
        }
    }
}
```

> Or in a separate separate file like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Or in a separate separate file linked from the `.actor.json`:
```

```json title=".actor.json"
{
    "actorSpecification": 1,
    "storages": {
        "dataset": "./dataset_schema.json"
    }
}
```

```json title="dataset_schema.json"
{
    "actorSpecification": 1,
    "fields": {
        "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
            "name": {
                "type": "string"
            }
        },
        "required": ["name"]
    },
    "views": {}
}
```

:::important

> The `$schema` line is important and must be exactly this value or it must be omitted:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Dataset schema needs to be a valid JSON schema draft-07, so the `$schema` line is important and must be exactly this value or it must be omitted:
```

Reviewer 2: I'd really enforce this as we should not be guessing.

`"$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#"`

:::

## Dataset validation

> When you define a schema of your default dataset, the schema is then always used when you insert data into the dataset to perform validation (we use [AJV](https://ajv.js.org/)).

Reviewer 2: One thing to consider - do we want to mention we currently use AJV? Perhaps AJV contains some JSON schema extensions, and if we replace them, we could change the expected behavior. Or is this not the thing?

Reviewer 3: I think it's better to mention it, because the creators can then look up the validation output and what it means. I do not think AJV contains any additions to JSON schema.

If the validation succeeds, nothing changes from the current behavior, data is stored and an empty response with status code 201 is returned.

**If the data you attempt to store in the dataset is invalid** (meaning any of the items received by the API fails the validation), **the whole request is discarded** and the API will return a response with status code 400 and the following JSON response:

> ```json

Reviewer 2: Please update the API docs with this and link them to this documentation. It's important to have it there.

{
    "error": {
        "type": "schema-validation-error",
        "message": "Schema validation failed",
        "data": {
            "invalidItems": [{
                "itemPosition": "<array index in the received array of items>",
                "validationErrors": "<Complete list of AJV validation error objects>"
            }]
        }
    }
}
```

The type of the AJV validation error object is [here](https://github.com/ajv-validator/ajv/blob/master/lib/types/index.ts#L86)

If you use the Apify JS client or Apify SDK and call `pushData` function you can access the validation errors in a `try catch` block like this:

```javascript
try {
    const response = await Actor.pushData(items);
} catch (error) {
    if (!error.data?.invalidItems) throw error;
    error.data.invalidItems.forEach((item) => {
        const { itemPosition, validationErrors } = item;
    });
}
```

> ## Examples

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Examples of common types of validation
```

Optional field (price is optional in this case):

```json
{
    "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
        "name": {
            "type": "string"
        },
        "price": {

>                 "type": "number"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            "type": "number"
```

        }
    },
    "required": ["name"]
}
```

Field with multiple types:

```json
{
    "price": {
        "type": ["string", "number"]
    }
}
```

Field with type `any`:

```json
{
    "price": {
        "type": ["string", "number", "object", "array", "boolean"]
    }
}
```

Enabling fields to be `null` :

```json
{
    "name": {
        "type": "string",
        "nullable": true
    }
}
```

Define type of objects in array:

```json
{
    "comments": {
        "type": "array",
        "items": {
            "type": "object",
            "properties": {
                "author_name": {
                    "type": "string"
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Define specific fields, but allow anything else to be added to the item:

```json
{
    "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
        "name": {
            "type": "string"
        }
    },
    "additionalProperties": true
}
```

See [json schema reference](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/reference) for additional options.

> Example of schema generator [here](https://www.liquid-technologies.com/online-json-to-schema-converter).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can also use [conversion tools](https://www.liquid-technologies.com/online-json-to-schema-converter) to convert an existing JSON document into it's JSON schema.
```

# Dataset field statistics

When you have the dataset fields schema set up, we then use the schema to generate a list of fields and measure statistics for these fields.

The measured statistics are following:

- **Null count:** how many items in the dataset have the field set to null
- **Empty count:** how many items in the dataset are `undefined` , meaning that for example empty string is not considered empty
- **Minimum and maximum**
  - For numbers, this is calculated directly
  - For strings, this field tracks string length
  - For arrays, this field tracks the number of items in the array
  - For objects, this tracks the number of keys

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- For booleans, this tracks whether the boolean was set to true. So minimum is always 0, but maximum can be either 1 or 0 based on whether at least on item in the dataset has the boolean field set to true.
```

:::note

> Currently, you cannot view these statistics. We will add API endpoint soon. But you can already use them in monitoring.

Reviewer 3: The `monitoring` label should be a link to the section of the monitoring docs talking about the statistics.

---
title: Dataset validation

> description:  Specify the dataset schema within the Actors so you can add monitoring and validation down to the field level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description:  Specify the dataset schema within the Actors so you can add monitoring and validation at the field level.
```

slug: /actors/development/actor-definition/dataset-schema/validation
---

> **Specify the dataset schema within the Actors so you can add monitoring and validation down to the field level.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Specify the dataset schema within the Actors so you can add monitoring and validation at the field level.**
```

---

To define a schema for a default dataset of an Actor run, you need to set `fields` property in the dataset schema.

:::note Schema limitations

Schema configuration is not available for named datasets or dataset views.

:::

:::info

The schema defines a single item in the dataset. Be careful not to define the schema as an array, it always needs to be a schema of an object.

> :::

Reviewer: Could we please avoid admonition under an admonition?

Author: it was added as a result of conversation above but I agree, good point, merging the text to only one admonition

                "properties": {
                    "name": {
                        "type": "string"
                    }
                },
                "required": ["name"]
            },
            "views": {}
        }
    }
}
```

Or in a separate separate file linked from the `.actor.json`:

```json title=".actor.json"
{
    "actorSpecification": 1,
    "storages": {
        "dataset": "./dataset_schema.json"
    }
}
```

```json title="dataset_schema.json"
{
    "actorSpecification": 1,
    "fields": {
        "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
        "type": "object",
        "properties": {
            "name": {
                "type": "string"
            }
        },
        "required": ["name"]
    },
    "views": {}
}
```

:::important

Dataset schema needs to be a valid JSON schema draft-07, so the `$schema` line is important and must be exactly this value or it must be omitted:

`"$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#"`

:::

## Dataset validation

When you define a schema of your default dataset, the schema is then always used when you insert data into the dataset to perform validation (we use [AJV](https://ajv.js.org/)).

> If the validation succeeds, nothing changes from the current behavior, data is stored and an empty response with status code 201 is returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the validation succeeds, nothing changes from the current behavior, data is stored and an empty response with status code `201` is returned.
```

> **If the data you attempt to store in the dataset is invalid** (meaning any of the items received by the API fails the validation), **the whole request is discarded** and the API will return a response with status code 400 and the following JSON response:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the data you attempt to store in the dataset is _invalid_ (meaning any of the items received by the API fails validation), _the entire request will be discarded_, The API will return a response with status code `400` and the following JSON response:
```

```json
{
    "error": {
        "type": "schema-validation-error",
        "message": "Schema validation failed",
        "data": {
            "invalidItems": [{
                "itemPosition": "<array index in the received array of items>",
                "validationErrors": "<Complete list of AJV validation error objects>"
            }]
        }
    }
}
```

> The type of the AJV validation error object is [here](https://github.com/ajv-validator/ajv/blob/master/lib/types/index.ts#L86)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The type of the AJV validation error object is [here](https://github.com/ajv-validator/ajv/blob/master/lib/types/index.ts#L86).
```

If you use the Apify JS client or Apify SDK and call `pushData` function you can access the validation errors in a `try catch` block like this:

```javascript
try {
    const response = await Actor.pushData(items);
} catch (error) {
    if (!error.data?.invalidItems) throw error;
    error.data.invalidItems.forEach((item) => {
        const { itemPosition, validationErrors } = item;
    });
}

> ```

Reviewer: What about Python Client & SDK? If we provide code sample for one, it would make sense to provide it for the other as well, and utilize [Tabs component](https://docusaurus.io/docs/markdown-features/tabs)

```json
{
    "price": {
        "type": ["string", "number"]
    }
}
```

Field with type `any`:

```json
{
    "price": {
        "type": ["string", "number", "object", "array", "boolean"]
    }
}
```

Enabling fields to be `null` :

```json
{
    "name": {
        "type": "string",
        "nullable": true
    }
}
```

Define type of objects in array:

```json
{
    "comments": {
        "type": "array",
        "items": {
            "type": "object",
            "properties": {
                "author_name": {
                    "type": "string"
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

Define specific fields, but allow anything else to be added to the item:

```json
{
    "$schema": "http://json-schema.org/draft-07/schema#",
    "type": "object",
    "properties": {
        "name": {
            "type": "string"
        }
    },
    "additionalProperties": true
}
```

See [json schema reference](https://json-schema.org/understanding-json-schema/reference) for additional options.

You can also use [conversion tools](https://www.liquid-technologies.com/online-json-to-schema-converter) to convert an existing JSON document into it's JSON schema.

> # Dataset field statistics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Dataset field statistics
```

> When you have the dataset fields schema set up, we then use the schema to generate a list of fields and measure statistics for these fields.
> 
> The measured statistics are following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you configure the dataset fields schema, we generates a field list and measure the following statistics:
```

- **Null count:** how many items in the dataset have the field set to null
- **Empty count:** how many items in the dataset are `undefined` , meaning that for example empty string is not considered empty
- **Minimum and maximum**
  - For numbers, this is calculated directly
  - For strings, this field tracks string length
  - For arrays, this field tracks the number of items in the array
  - For objects, this tracks the number of keys

>   - For booleans, this tracks whether the boolean was set to true. Minimum is always 0, but maximum can be either 1 or 0 based on whether at least on item in the dataset has the boolean field set to true.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - For booleans, this tracks whether the boolean was set to true. Minimum is always 0, but maximum can be either 1 or 0 based on whether at least one item in the dataset has the boolean field set to true.
```

> :::note
> 
> Currently, you cannot view these statistics. We will add API endpoint soon. But you can already use them in [monitoring](../../../../monitoring#alert-configuration).
> 
> :::

Reviewer: Please do not add any information about what may or may not come in the future 

```suggestion

You can use them in [monitoring](../../../../monitoring#alert-configuration).

```

                    "type": "number"
                }
            },
            "required": ["width", "height"]
        },
        "price": {
            "type": ["string", "number"]
        }
    },
    "required": ["name", "price"]
}
```

The stored statistics and fields in the database look like this:

```json
{
    "_id" : "1lVGVBkWIhSYPY1dD",
    "fields" : [
        "name",
        "description",
        "dimensions",
        "dimensions/width",
        "dimensions/height",
        "price"
    ],
    "stats": {
        "description": {
            "emptyCount": 105,
            "max": 19,
            "min": 19
        },
        "dimensions": {
            "emptyCount": 144,
            "max": 2,
            "min": 2,
            "nullCount": 86
        },
        "dimensions/height": {
            "emptyCount": 230,
            "max": 992,
            "min": 18
        },
        "dimensions/width": {
            "emptyCount": 230,
            "max": 977,
            "min": 4
        },
        "name": {
            "max": 13,
            "min": 11
        },
        "price": {
            "max": 999,
            "min": 1
        }
    }
}
```

:::note

> If you want to see for yourself, check `datasetStatistics` collection. The ids correspond to the ids of datasets.

Reviewer 3: This whole section should not be in the documentation. It should be added once we add the dataset statistics API endpoint with the link to the documentation of the endpoint.

Author: thanks for checking it, the example part is removed now
